Class Information: CS 480, Summer 2026

Assignment Information: Programming Assignment 3, Disk Arm Scheduling Simulator

Team Members:
  - Luis Villalon: cssc3169 (Use this account for testing)
  - Bobby Bavongkhoun: cssc3110

List of project files: 
  - README                  - This file.
  - Makefile                - Builds the "simarm" executable.
  - constants.h             - Shared simulation constants (cylinder range, initial head position).
  - disk_scheduler.h        - Abstract DiskScheduler interface implemented by every scheduling algorithm.
  - request_generator.h     - Declaration of the random request sequence generator.
  - request_generator.cpp   - Implementation of the random request sequence generator.
  - fcfs_scheduler.h        - Declaration of the FCFS (First-Come, First-Served) scheduler.
  - fcfs_scheduler.cpp      - Implementation of the FCFS scheduler.
  - sstf_scheduler.h        - Declaration of the SSTF (Shortest Seek Time First) scheduler.
  - sstf_scheduler.cpp      - Implementation of the SSTF scheduler.
  - scan_scheduler.h        - Declaration of the SCAN (elevator algorithm) scheduler.
  - scan_scheduler.cpp      - Implementation of the SCAN scheduler.
  - simarm.cpp              - Program entry point; generates a request sequence and runs it through every registered scheduler.

COMPILATION:
From the a3/ directory, run:
    make
This compiles all source files with g++ and links them into an executable named "simarm".

EXECUTION:
    ./simarm <number-of-requests>

  <number-of-requests>  A positive integer giving the number of cylinder
                         requests to randomly generate and service. Required.
  - Example:
      ./simarm 64

The program generates a sequence of that many random cylinder requests in the
range 0-999, using a fixed initial disk arm head position of 50 (see
constants.h). It prints the generated sequence, then services that same
sequence with each registered scheduling algorithm (FCFS, SSTF, SCAN),
printing the total head movement (seek distance, in cylinders) required by
each algorithm.

If the number of arguments is not exactly one, or the argument is not a
positive integer, the program prints a usage message to stderr and exits
with a non-zero status.

CLEANUP:
    make clean

DESIGN DECISIONS:
  - Each scheduling algorithm is implemented behind a common DiskScheduler
    interface (disk_scheduler.h) with name() and total_distance() methods.
    simarm.cpp holds a vector of DiskScheduler pointers and drives all of them
    identically, so adding a new algorithm only requires implementing the
    interface and registering an instance in main() -- no existing algorithm
    code has to change.
  - Simulation-wide constants (cylinder range, initial head position) are
    centralized in constants.h so every algorithm is evaluated under
    identical starting conditions and the values only need to be changed in
    one place.
  - Request generation is factored into its own module (request_generator.h/
    .cpp) so the exact same request sequence can be serviced by every
    algorithm in a single run, making the reported seek totals directly
    comparable.
  - FCFS, SSTF, and SCAN were chosen because together they span the main
    trade-offs a disk scheduler has to make: FCFS is the no-optimization
    baseline everything else should beat, SSTF shows the benefit of greedily
    minimizing each individual seek, and SCAN shows how bounding worst-case
    wait time with a one-directional sweep compares against both. Running
    all three on the same randomly generated request sequence makes those
    trade-offs directly visible in the reported seek totals rather than
    just theoretical.

EXTRA FEATURES:
  - None beyond the required FCFS, SSTF, and SCAN algorithms.

DEFICIENCIES:
  - No known bugs at this time.

LESSONS LEARNED:
  - Working on this assignment made concrete how disk I/O requests aren't
    serviced in the order they arrive just because they're on a shared
    resource: the OS has to queue pending cylinder requests and hand them to
    the disk arm in whatever order actually minimizes total seek movement,
    since the arm is a physical, slow-moving piece of hardware and seek time
    dominates disk access latency. That queuing/ordering decision is exactly
    what a disk scheduling algorithm is -- a policy for picking the next
    request out of the pending set.
  - Implementing FCFS first showed why scheduling matters at all: servicing
    requests in raw arrival order ignores their cylinder positions entirely,
    so the arm can end up sweeping back and forth across the disk when a
    smarter ordering would have covered the same requests with far less
    total movement. FCFS's only real benefit is fairness/simplicity -- no
    request ever waits behind a "closer" one that arrived later.
  - Implementing SSTF made the greedy trade-off concrete: always servicing
    the closest pending request minimizes each individual seek and gives
    great average-case total movement, but it can starve requests that sit
    far from the head if closer requests keep arriving, since there's no
    mechanism to prioritize a request just because it's been waiting.
  - Implementing SCAN showed the fix for that starvation problem: sweeping
    the arm in one direction, servicing every request in its path, then
    reversing at the end of the disk bounds a request's worst-case wait to
    at most one full sweep. That fairness guarantee costs some average-case
    seek distance compared to SSTF, since the arm may pass close to a
    request early in a sweep but not service it until much later.
